Middleware reference guide (#445)
dojo/framework: docs/en/middleware/supplemental.md

-   Pausing further rendering of consuming widgets while waiting for the external value to come back
-   Resuming rendering and invalidating consuming widgets so they can be re-rendered once the external value is made available through the local cache

> src/middleware/ValueCachingMiddleware.ts

```ts
import { create, defer, invalidator } from '@dojo/framework/core/vdom';
import { cache } from '@dojo/framework/core/middleware/cache';

const factory = create({ defer, cache });

export const ValueCachingMiddleware = factory(({ middleware: { defer, cache, invalidator }}) => {
	get(key: string) {
		const cachedValue = cache.get(key);
		if (cachedValue) {
			return cachedValue;
		}
		// Cache miss: fetch the value somehow through a promise
		const promise = fetchExternalValue(value);
		// Pause further widget rendering
		defer.pause();
		promise.then((result) => {
			// Cache the value for subsequent renderings
			cache.set(key, result);
			// Resume widget rendering once the value is available
			defer.resume();
			// Invalidate the widget for a re-render
			invalidator();
		});
		return null;
	}
});

export default ValueCachingMiddleware;
```

## Passing properties to middleware

> As middleware is defined via the `create()` utility function, a properties interface can also be given in the same way as specifying property interfaces for functional widgets. The main difference however is that middleware properties are added to the properties interface of any consuming widgets. This means property values are given when instantiating the widgets, not when widgets make use of the middleware. Properties are considered read-only throughout the whole composition hierarchy, so middleware cannot alter property values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As middleware gets defined via the `create()` utility function, a properties interface can also be given in the same way as specifying property interfaces for functional widgets. The main difference is that middleware properties are added to the properties interface of any consuming widgets. This means property values are given when instantiating the widgets, not when widgets make use of the middleware. Properties are considered read-only throughout the entire composition hierarchy, so middleware cannot alter property values.
```

The following is an example of middleware with a properties interface:

> src/middleware/middlewareWithProperties.tsx

```ts
import { create } from '@dojo/framework/core/vdom';

const factory = create().properties<{ conditional?: boolean }>();

export const middlewareWithProperties = factory(({ properties }) => {
	return {
		getConditionalState() {
			return properties.conditional ? 'Conditional is true' : 'Conditional is false';
		}
	};
});

export default middlewareWithProperties;
```

> This middleware and its property can be used in a widget such as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This middleware and its property can get used in a widget:
```

> src/widgets/MiddlewarePropertiesWidget.tsx

```tsx
import { create, tsx } from '@dojo/framework/core/vdom';
import middlewareWithProperties from '../middleware/middlewareWithProperties';

const render = create({ middlewareWithProperties });
export const MiddlewarePropertiesWidget = render(({ properties, middleware: { middlewareWithProperties } }) => {
	return (
		<virtual>
			<div>{`Middleware property value: ${properties.conditional}`}</div>
			<div>{`Middleware property usage: ${middlewareWithProperties.getConditionalState()}`}</div>
		</virtual>
	);
});

export default MiddlewarePropertiesWidget;
```

The value for the middleware `conditional` property is then specified when creating instances of `MiddlewarePropertiesWidget`, for example:

> src/main.tsx

```tsx
import renderer, { tsx } from '@dojo/framework/core/vdom';
import MiddlewarePropertiesWidget from './widgets/MiddlewarePropertiesWidget';

const r = renderer(() => <MiddlewarePropertiesWidget conditional={true} />);
r.mount();
```

> # List of available middleware

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# List of Available Middleware
```

Dojo provides a variety of middleware within the framework that implement many useful enterprise-grade web application requirements.

> ## Core render middleware

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Core Render Middleware
```

> The `@dojo/framework/core/vdom` module includes foundational middleware that is useful across the majority of Dojo applications. These are mainly useful when building other custom middleware (they underpin the [additional middleware](#optional-middleware) offered by the framework), but can occasionally be useful in general widget development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `@dojo/framework/core/vdom` module includes foundational middleware that is useful across the majority of Dojo applications. These core render middleware are mainly useful when building other custom middleware (they underpin the [additional middleware](#optional-middleware) offered by the framework), but can occasionally be useful in general widget development.
```

### `invalidator`

The most important middleware which provides a hook into a widget's invalidation lifecycle. Calling `invalidator()` will queue the widget for rendering during the next scheduled render.

**API:**

```ts
import invalidator from '@dojo/framework/core/vdom';
```

-   `invalidator()`
    -   Marks the consuming widget as invalid and requiring a re-render.

### `node`

Provides widgets access to their underlying DOM nodes, identified by node `key`s. When a valid DOM node is requested but unavailable, Dojo will re-render the widget as soon as the DOM node becomes available.

**API:**

```ts
import node from '@dojo/framework/core/vdom';
```

-   `node.get(key: string | number): HTMLElement | null`
    -   Returns the widget's specified DOM element, identified by the node's `key` property. Returns `null` if the specified DOM element does not exist for the current widget.

> ### `defer`

Reviewer 2: Can we put this at the bottom of the list?

**API:**

```ts
import destroy from '@dojo/framework/core/vdom';
```

-   `destroy(destroyFunction: () => void)`
    -   Sets the `destroyFunction` that will be called when the current widget is destroyed. Setting a function will override any destroy function previously set for the widget.

### `getRegistry`

Provides access to the widget's own `Registry` instance, as well as the root application `Registry` if required, via a handler interface.

**Note:** The registry is an advanced concept not typically required when writing Dojo applications. It is mainly used internally by the framework to implement more advanced user-facing functionality such as [Dojo stores](../stores/basic-usage.md).

**API:**

```ts
import getRegistry from '@dojo/framework/core/vdom';
```

-   `getRegistry(): RegistryHandler | null`
    -   Returns the `RegistryHandler` for the current widget, or `null` if the widget has not yet been fully initialized.

> ## Optional middleware

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Optional Middleware
```

Dojo provides a variety of optional middleware that widgets can include when needing to implement specific requirements.

> ### `block`

Reviewer 2: Can we put this at the bottom of the list?

Allows widgets to execute modules known as **blocks** within Node.js at build time. Typically used as part of build-time rendering.

> Described in detail in the [Building](../building/supplemental.md#build-time-rendering) reference guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Described in detail in the [Building reference guide](../building/supplemental.md#build-time-rendering).
```

**API:**

```ts
import block from '@dojo/framework/core/middleware/block';
```

-   `block<T extends (...args: any[]) => any>(module: T)`
    -   Executes the specified block module and returns its result.

> ### `breakpoint`

Reviewer 2: This should probably go below `resize`, it looks like they are ordered alphabetically at the moment but I think they should be grouped together by functionality and ordered by "importance"/"how often they would be used" by consumers.

Reviewer 2: Off the top of my head the order should be something like:

* cache
* icache
* theme
* i18n
* dimensions
* intersection
* resize
* breakpoint
* store
* focus
* injector
* block

Author: Done - I've also moved the core middleware list after the optional set so the entire set is ordered by usage frequency

> Allows widgets to determine a specific width breakpoint that is matched given the current width of one of their virtual nodes. Useful when creating widgets that can adapt to a variety of display widths, such as widgets that work at both mobile and desktop resolutions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Allows widgets to determine a specific width breakpoint that is matched given the current width of one of their virtual nodes. This middleware is useful when creating widgets that can adapt to a variety of display widths, such as widgets that work at both mobile and desktop resolutions.
```

Composes the [`resize`](#resize) middleware to obtain the element width and to automatically invalidate the widget when its width is adjusted.

**Note:** If no custom width breakpoints are given, Dojo will default to the following set:

-   `SM`: 0
-   `MD`: 576
-   `LG`: 768
-   `XL`: 960

**API:**

```ts
import breakpoint from '@dojo/framework/core/middleware/breakpoint';
```

```ts
interface Breakpoints {
	[index: string]: number;
}
```

-   `breakpoint.get(key: string | number, breakpoints: Breakpoints = defaultBreakpoints)`
    -   Returns the breakpoint that the widget's specified output node (identified by its `key`) matches, given the node's current width. Custom breakpoints can be provided through the `breakpoints` argument. The return value is an object containing a `breakpoint` property, identifying the name of the breakpoint that was matched, and a `contentRect` property which contains the same value as calling `resize.get(key)` would return.

> When using the same set of breakpoints in many locations, it is easier to define the set once rather than have to pass it in to every `breakpoint.get()` call. Applications can define their own custom breakpoint middleware with appropriate defaults via:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using the same set of breakpoints in many locations, it is easier to define the set once rather than needing to pass it to every `breakpoint.get()` call. Applications can define their own custom breakpoint middleware with appropriate defaults via:
```

> src/middleware/myCustomBreakpoint.ts

```ts
import createBreakpointMiddleware from '@dojo/framework/core/middleware/breakpoint';

const myCustomBreakpoint = createBreakpointMiddleware({ Narrow: 0, Wide: 500 });

export default myCustomBreakpoint;
```

### `cache`

Provides a simple widget-scoped cache that can persist small amounts of data between widget renders.

**API:**

```ts
import cache from '@dojo/framework/core/middleware/cache';
```

-   `cache.get<T = any>(key: any): T | null`
    -   Retrieves the currently cached value for the specified `key`, or `null` on a cache miss.
-   `cache.set<T = any>(key: any, value: T)`
    -   Stores the provided `value` in the cache against the specified `key`.
-   `cache.clear()`
    -   Clears all values currently stored in the widget's local cache.

### `dimensions`

Provides various size and position information about a widget's underlying nodes.

**API:**

```ts
import dimensions from '@dojo/framework/core/middleware/dimensions';
```

-   `dimensions.get(key: string | number): Readonly<DimensionResults>`

>     -   Returns dimension information for the widget's specified DOM element, identified by the node's `key` property. If the node does not exist for the current widget (either has not yet been rendered or an invalid key was specified), all returned values will be `0`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -   Returns dimension information for the widget's specified DOM element, identified by the node's `key` property. If the node does not exist for the current widget (either has not yet been rendered or an invalid key was specified), all returned values are `0`.
```

```

-   `focus.shouldFocus(): boolean`
    -   Returns `true` if focus should be specified within the current render cycle. Will only return `true` once, after which `false` is returned from future calls until `focus.focus()` is called again. This function is typically passed as the [`focus` property](../creating-widgets/supplemental.md#handling-focus) to a specific VDOM node, allowing the widget to direct where focus should be applied.
-   `focus.focus()`
    -   Can be called to indicate that the widget or one of its children requires focus in the next render cycle. This function is typically passed as the `onfocus` event handler to outputted VDOM nodes, allowing widgets to respond to user-driven focus change events.
-   `focus.isFocused(key: string | number): boolean`
    -   Returns `true` if the widget's VDOM node identified by the specified `key` currently has focus. Returns `false` if the relevant VDOM node does not have focus, or does not exist for the current widget.

### `i18n`

Allows widgets to localize their message text when rendering, and also provides applications the ability to set a locale and determine what the currently set locale is, if any.

> Described in detail in the [Internationalization](../i18n/supplemental.md#internationalizing-a-dojo-application) reference guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Described in detail in the [Dojo Internationalization reference guide](../i18n/supplemental.md#internationalizing-a-dojo-application).
```

-   `clear()`
    -   Clears all values currently stored in the widget's local cache.

### `injector`

Allows retrieving injectors from the Dojo registry and assigning invalidation callback functions to then.

**Note:** Injectors and the registry are advanced concepts not typically required when writing Dojo applications. They are mainly used internally by the framework to implement more advanced user-facing functionality such as [Dojo stores](../stores/basic-usage.md).

**API:**

```ts
import injector from '@dojo/framework/core/middleware/injector';
```

-   `injector.subscribe(label: RegistryLabel, callback: Function = invalidator)`
    -   Subscribes the given `callback` invalidation function against the specified registry `label` injector (if one exists). If a `callback` is not specified, the [`invalidator`](#invalidator) middleware is used by default so that the current widget will be marked as invalid and re-rendered when the injector makes its data available.
-   `injector.get<T>(label: RegistryLabel): T | null`
    -   Retrieves the current injector associated with the given registry `label`, or `null` if no such injector exists.

### `intersection`

> Provides information on whether a node is visible in a particular viewport using the [Intersection Observer API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Intersection_Observer_API).

Reviewer: It might be worth noting that we currently focus on v1 of the API and not v2 ( https://developers.google.com/web/updates/2019/02/intersectionobserver-v2 )

Author: Added a note accordingly.

> As this is still an upcoming web standard, the framework automatically ensures the underlying API is made available when running an application in a browser that does not yet support it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the Intersection Observer API is still an emerging web standard, the framework automatically ensures the underlying API is made available when running an application in a browser that does not yet support it.
```

**API:**

```ts
import intersection from '@dojo/framework/core/middleware/intersection';
```

-   `intersection.get(key: string | number, options: IntersectionGetOptions = {}): IntersectionResult`
    -   Returns intersection information for the widget's specified DOM element, identified by the node's `key` property. If the node does not exist for the current widget (either has not yet been rendered or an invalid key was specified), a result is returned indicating zero intersection.

> The `options` argument allows for more control on how intersection is calculated. The available fields are the same as those for the [intersection observer API options](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Intersection_Observer_API#Intersection_observer_options).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `options` argument allows for more control on how intersection gets calculated. The available fields are the same as those for the [intersection observer API options](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Intersection_Observer_API#Intersection_observer_options).
```

| `intersectionRatio` | `number`  | The ratio of the element's bounding box that is intersecting the root element's viewport, from `0.0` to `1.0`. By default the root element is considered the browser's viewport unless an element is specified via the `options.root` argument. |
| `isIntersecting`    | `boolean` | A value of `true` indicates that the target element intersects with the root element's viewport (representing a transition into a state of intersection). A value of `false` indicates a transition from intersecting to not-intersecting.      |

### `resize`

Allows a widget to respond to resize events of its DOM nodes using a [`ResizeObserver`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ResizeObserver), and provides updated information on the node's new size when a resize occurs. Using this middleware is an effective way of creating applications that are responsive across a variety of viewport sizes.

> As this is still an upcoming web standard, the framework automatically ensures the underlying API is made available when running an application in a browser that does not yet support it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As Resize Observer is still an emerging web standard, the framework automatically ensures the underlying API is made available when running an application in a browser that does not yet support it.
```

**API:**

```ts
import resize from '@dojo/framework/core/middleware/resize';
```

-   `resize.get(key: string | number): DOMRectReadOnly | null`
    -   Returns size information for the widget's specified DOM element, identified by the node's `key` property. If the node does not exist for the current widget (either has not yet been rendered or an invalid key was specified), `null` is returned. The returned object is a standard [`DOMRectReadOnly`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/DOMRectReadOnly) structure.

### `store`

Provides widgets access to their externalized state when using the Dojo stores component.

> Described in detail in the [Stores](../stores/basic-usage.md) reference guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Described in detail in the [Dojo Stores reference guide](../stores/basic-usage.md).
```

**API:**

```ts
import store from '@dojo/framework/core/middleware/store';
```

-   `store.get<U = any>(path: Path<S, U>): U`
    -   Retrieves the value from the store at the specified `path`. The composing widget will also be invalidated and re-rendered when the associated value is changed.
-   `store.path(path: any, ...segments: any): StatePaths<S>`
    -   Returns a store path beginning at a specified root with a number of additional segments.
-   `store.at<U = any>(path: Path<S, U[]>, index: number)`
    -   Returns a store path that includes a numeric index when accessing stored array values.
-   `store.executor<T extends Process<any, any>>(process: T): ReturnType<T>`
    -   Executes the given `process` within the composing widget's store and returns the result.

### `theme`

Allows widgets to theme their CSS classes when rendering, and also provides applications the ability to set themes and determine what the currently set theme is, if any.

> Described in detail in the [Styling and Theming](../styling-and-theming/supplemental.md#making-themeable-widgets) reference guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Described in detail in the [Dojo Styling and Theming reference guide](../styling-and-theming/supplemental.md#making-themeable-widgets).
```
